#summary How to download the OpenDial toolkit

= Downloads =

== 1. !OpenDial toolkit ==

You have the choice between downloading stable release packages or the development version on the SVN repository.


=== Stable release packages:===
 * *[http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/opendial-1.0.zip OpenDial, latest version]*   (version 1.0, released on 25/10/2014)
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/ older versions]

=== Bleeding-edge version:===

If you prefer to work with the code on the SVN development trunk, simply enter the following to checkout the code:
{{{
 svn checkout http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ opendial
}}}


See the [OpenDialUserManual user manual] for more instructions on how to use !OpenDial.<br><br>


== 2. !OpenDial plugins==

A series of plugins have been developed to extend !OpenDial with new modules. The plugins currently available are:
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/plugins/nuancespeech.zip Nuance Speech]: Cloud-based speech recognition and synthesis using the [http://dragonmobile.nuancemobiledeveloper.com speech API] developed by Nuance.
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/plugins/attspeech.zip AT&T Speech]: Cloud-based speech recognition and synthesis using the [http://developer.att.com/apis/speech speech API] developed by AT&T.
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/plugins/mary.zip Mary TTS]: Local speech synthesis using the open-source [http://mary.dfki.de Mary] TTS engine.
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/plugins/sphinx.zip Sphinx ASR]: Local speech recognition using the open-source [http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/ Sphinx 4] ASR engine.
 * [http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/downloads/plugins/nao.zip Nao bindings]: Bindings for connecting !OpenDial with the [http://www.aldebaran-robotics.com Nao] robot.

In order to integrate these plugins, simply download their ZIP-file and follow the instructions in the README.txt file. 