#summary User (and developer) manual for the OpenDial toolkit
#sidebar TableOfContents

= !OpenDial User Guide =

This user guide explains how to practically employ the !OpenDial toolkit to develop dialogue systems.

 * *[GettingStarted Getting started]*<br>How to compile and start !OpenDial.

 * *[SimpleExample Step-by-step example]*<br>A first step-by-step example of dialogue domain specification for !OpenDial.

 * *[FlightBookingExample Flight-booking example]*<br>A more extensive example of !OpenDial dialogue domain for a flight-booking application.

 * *[DialogueDomains Dialogue domains]* <br>XML encoding format for dialogue domains.

 * *[AdvancedModelling Advanced modelling]* <br>Build-in functionalities for handling nested conditions, variable references, quantification<br> mechanisms, pattern matching, lists of elements and predictive variables.

 * *[SpeechRecognitionAndSynthesis Speech recognition and synthesis]*<br>How to use the available plugins for speech recognition and synthesis integrated in !OpenDial.

 * *[ParameterEstimation Learning rule parameters from data]*<br>How to collect dialogue data and exploit it to estimate the parameters of probability or utility rules.

 * *[ExternalModules External modules]*<br>How to implement new modules with !OpenDial.

 * *[FAQ FAQ]*<br>Frequently asked questions about the !OpenDial toolkit.

 * *[http://opendial.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/javadoc/index.html Javadoc]*<br>!OpenDial API (latest version).

<br>

Your feedback is much appreciated!  If you have any questions, problems or suggestions about !OpenDial<br> or its documentation, feel free to send a message to the [http://groups.google.com/group/opendial-users opendial-users] mailing list.

If you are using !OpenDial for research purposes, please refer to my PhD thesis in your papers:
{{{
@phdthesis{plison-thesis2014,
  title={{S}tructured {P}robabilistic {M}odelling for {D}ialogue {M}anagement},
  author={P. Lison},
  year={2014},
  school={University of Oslo}
}
}}}



----

<font size="1">!YourKit is kindly supporting open source projects with its full-featured Java Profiler. !YourKit, LLC is the creator of innovative and intelligent tools for profiling Java and .NET applications. Take a look at !YourKit's leading software products: [http://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/index.jsp YourKit Java Profiler] and [http://www.yourkit.com/.net/profiler/index.jsp YourKit .NET Profiler]</font>.