#summary Release note for OpenDial version 1.1.

= Major changes in version 1.1 =


 # *Upgrade to Java 8* (which is required to compiled and run the toolkit).<br><br>
 # Major refactoring of the internal code base and efficiency improvements in the inference algorithms. For example, the sampling algorithm can now take full advantage of multi-core architectures.<br><br>
 # Support for Nuance cloud-based speech recognition and synthesis via the `NuanceSpeech` plugin.<br><br>
 # Support for data-driven dependency parsing with a new module bridging !OpenDial to the MaltParser.<br><br>
 # Ability to connect two remote instances of !OpenDial via the `Connect to Remote Client` functionality. This can notably be used to conduct Wizard-of-Oz experiment, as explained in the section [https://code.google.com/p/opendial/wiki/ParameterEstimation#1._Data_collection Data collection]. It can also be used to develop distributed dialogue architectures.<br><br>
 # Basic support for incremental processing via the `addIncrementalContent` method in `DialogueSystem`.<br><br>
 # The pattern matching functionalities used in the rule conditions have been extended to capture optional or alternative elements. For instance, the condition `<if var="u_u" relation="contains" value="one (big|small)? object"/>` will match strings such as "one big object", "one small object" or "one object". Such patterns can be very useful for natural language understanding models.<br><br>
 # Probabilistic rules can now be associated with a particular priority level (via the `priority` attribute in the XML specification), allowing them to supercede one another.<br><br>
 # Inclusion of a text-only interface (which can be used to run !OpenDial in terminals without support for X11 forwarding). <br><br>
 # Removal of the `Load modules` functionality in the GUI.<br><br>
 # Inclusion of a new, extended example of dialogue domain: the flight-booking domain.